---
layout: post
comments: true
title: The In Between Space and Embracing Our Feminine Side
image: http://media.tumblr.com/96fd43e9658e77825a6dc06444635708/tumblr_inline_mw8mffRuGf1qc5937.jpg
---

<em>"Finding out about being instead of doing is the sacred task of the feminine." - Maureen Murdock</em>

I am currently in a transition period in my life. It began in July 2013 when I returned home to San Francisco after traveling around the world for a year with my boyfriend. We visited 17 countries on 4 continents. The trip changed the way I perceive the world and myself, but at the end of the year, I felt ready to return to the city, family and friends that I love. Coming home wasn’t the “happy ending” I thought it would be. The first few months I slipped into a mild depression and I felt like I was losing my sense of self. I was torn between two versions of me: the person I was before the trip, and the person I was on the trip.  On every familiar street, mirages of my old self greeted me. I didn’t want to embrace my old ways of being but at the same time, I couldn’t hold on to my traveler-identity now that I was home. I was living in my boyfriends parents’ house, I had no job, and no real commitments. The few obligations I did have felt overwhelming. The result was depression, anxiety and a feeling of deep-loss. Eventually, I visited my long-lost therapist who half laughed as he asked “Didn’t anyone tell you coming home was going to be hard? Give yourself some time.” 

So that’s what I did. I stopped saying yes to every invitation, I quit offering long answers to questions about the trip (when I didn’t feel open) and I allowed myself time to mourn my past selves. In giving myself space to explore my feelings and experiences, I became curious about them. I began to spend a lot of time journaling, meditating and doing yoga. I was searching for the root of my unease. 

Almost as soon as a started to honor my time-of-transition (with curiosity and openness) things started to fall into place. My boyfriend and I moved into a beautiful condo, in a great neighborhood, and I began to build a routine that nurtured me. The depression lifted, but I was surprised to find the in-between feeling intensified. I’m experiencing strange dreams and I have difficulty separating them from reality. I feel unambitious but at the same time I fill my days productively, and often creatively. By the time I go to bed, I’m satisfied with what I’ve achieved, but I’m not sure where my energy is getting me. The strangest part of the in-between space is that that the “loss-of-self” feeling is still there, just without the sadness (ok, sometimes sadness too). I have a very acute feeling of being in between two versions of myself. But instead of trying to cling to some self-label, job or activity that might fill this void, I’ve begun to welcome the chasm. 

One metaphor that has come to mind, is a rabbit chasing a carrot around a track. Most of us have carrots. It’s often a great job, a lot of money, a perfect relationship, or a unique identity (say for example “the world traveller”). The carrot is different for everyone but the identifying quality is that it’s just out of reach. For me, without the “traveller” identity and without a job, I seem to have lost my carrot. At first I think I mourned the carrot, and I tried to find something new to chase. But now I’ve settled in to a fairly carrot-free lifestyle. And removing that orange vegetable, has opened up a lot of space in my life. Granted I’m still looking for a job, so time comes easily to me, but it’s more then just time. It’s the permission that I have given myself: the permission to explore the “in-between space”. And with this space, I’ve welcomed a sudden urge to be creative. Lately I’ve taken up cooking, decorating projects around our new condo, drawing (not well, but cheerfully), and of course writing (a lot!). The best part is that I’m doing all these things for me. Not because I’m “supposed to” or because I’m being encouraged by the outside world, but because they make me happy. Embracing this combination of time and creativity has made me think of gestation. After all, gestation is the ultimate feminine power, made out of time and creation. 

As I began to play with the ideas of creation and gestation, two books came into my life. The first book I’ll mention, “The Browser’s Book of Beginnings” is about how things began. I only read one chapter, rather off-handedly, but the chapter was about human evolution. One section about the paleolithic era, surmised that when our early-ancestors of inhibited caves (often temporarily), the dwellings were primarily filled by women who were having and caring for babies. The men, on the other hand, were out hunting and gathering. Now this concept is nothing new, but it caught my attention because during this same time I was reading Maureen Murdock’s “The Heroines Journey.” The premise of this beautiful book is that we, as a culture (men and women), have cut ourselves off from female energy. In the beginning of the book the author, Maureen Murdock, poses the question: if the hero’s voyage (in an archetypal sense) is to achieve, to conquer and to save, then what is the heroine’s journey? The response she receives from one archetypal expert is that there are no heroines. In most myths the women is already there, insomuch as she understands and accepts herself. Her voyage is to regain her own power, not to conquer or to achieve something outside of herself. In this sense she is mother earth, the ultimate creator, and there is no outward journey for her because all is born from within her. Now before I go any further (or offend any fellow feminists), let me explain that everyone (men and women) has both feminine and masculine energy to varying degrees. However as a culture, we tend to identify with and value a more active, outward-facing, production-driven energy. We are always looking outside of ourselves, our families, and nature for something more. We’re cavemen. But it occurred to me while reading these books that, right now, I’m a cavewomen embracing a more feminine, introspective, and passive energy. 

As I’ve opened up to this way of being, I’ve been thinking (and reading) more about feminine energy. In The Heroine’s Journey, Maureen Murdock challenges us to explore the ways in which we reject our feminine sides. We may distance ourselves from our mothers (and identify with our fathers), criticize our bodies, or  ignore our intuitions and needs. But eventually we all experience something that jolts us out of our over-achieving masculine mode, and puts us back in touch with our feminine nature. It’s usually  the loss of something that had helped us define ourselves (aka the carrot). When this happens the result is often a period of intense introversion, or even depression. However, I’ve found that by embracing the in-between-space, I’ve found a softer, kinder and more creative part of myself. Right now I’m happy in my cave.

Of course, sometime soon it will be time for me to emerge and beacon my inner hero, but by allowing myself this time of transition, I’m gaining valuable insights as to where I really want/need to be heroic. Our life on this planet is short and our energy is not guaranteed. We owe it to ourselves to explore the in-between when it presents itself (as difficult as it can be). After all, only by allowing gestation to take its course can something new be born. 

It’s in this state of mind that I have titled this blog “The in Between Space.” In the coming posts, I’ll be exploring myself and the world through the lens of someone who is interested in living a life of meaning and compassion. I hope a few people out there will find it valuable.

One last thing, this week my thoughts and prayers go out to the people in the Philippines. If you’d like to donate something, [here’s an article](http://worldnews.nbcnews.com/_news/2013/11/13/21386694-how-to-help-organizations-offering-relief-to-typhoon-haiyan-survivors) about organizations that are providing relief services. 