---
layout: post
comments: true
title: The Power of Our Shadow
image: http://media.tumblr.com/41798e226eabc90d9046d3a433c1aefa/tumblr_inline_n30q56Ui3i1qc5937.jpg
---

<em>“We cannot change anything until we accept it, condemnation does not liberate it oppresses.” -Carl Jung</em>

When someone acts like a “know-it-all” it drives me a little crazy. At best I’ll be quietly annoyed by it, and at worst I’ll match their arrogant demeanor with my own.  It’s only recently that I have been able to identify and communicate this pattern. The insight emerged from my growing interest theory of transference and shadow (first described by Sigmund Freud and expanded upon by Carl Jung). These ideas have to do with how we cope with the darker, less desirable aspects of ourselves. 

A human being is a complicated creature. We have the capacity for a broad range of emotions, thoughts, desires, and motivations. To complicate things further, we live in a convoluted universe, that even the best scientists struggle to understand. With so much happening both internally and externally, we risk becoming overwhelmed and ultimately unable to function. Fortunately we have a defense system, known as our ego, to protect us. The ego’s job is to discriminate. Everything we experience is brought to trial in our own internal courtroom. The ego rules each experience as good, bad or not important. These rulings shape how we perceive the world and how we choose to present ourselves. 

What shadow work asks us to do is dig up the parts of ourselves, and the world, we have labeled as “bad” and recognize them as part of who we are. You might be wondering, why dig it up at all? Why not just let my ego continue to protect me from a bunch of bad stuff that I don’t like? The answer is that we outgrow many of our ego defenses, and without exploring our darker sides our “shadow” can begin to cause us a lot of unpleasantness.

For example, if someone grew up in a household with a lot of anger they may decide that anger is “bad” and try to live a life in which it is not present. As a child, labeling anger as bad was very helpful. It would protect them from internalizing the anger, and becoming overly fearful. However, in life we inevitably come across things that make us feel angry. If we haven’t accepted this part of ourselves (e.g. by thinking “I’m not an angry person”), we may bury it in our subconscious. Eventually though, everything we bury starts to bubble to the surface. Unable to own these feelings, we become irritated by the same emotions appearing in those around us. Instead of admitting to ourselves, “I’m feeling a lot of anger,” we have a strong reaction (irritation, frustration, anger, sadness, or closing off) to the behavior of others. 

This kind of external projection is known as transference and it is the key to identifying our own unique shadows. Seeing the parts of ourselves that we hide is very hard to do. It is so much part of how we understand the world that it’s like trying to see the air we breath. What we can identify is what bothers us in other people. There is a great quote by a phycologist named Ken Wilbur that says “projection of the ego is very easily identified: if a person or thing informs us, we probably aren’t projecting; on the other hand, if it affects us, chances are that we are a victim of our own projections.” In other words, if your friend gets angry and you think “ok, they’re angry, what can I do to help?” anger probably isn’t a shadow issue for you. But if your friend is mad and you think “what the f&*$ is wrong them? They’re out of control. I can’t handle this!” then you might be working with some transference. Shadow material can be expressed outwardly or brooded over internally, but there is always an emotional response. The people closest to us tend to trigger us the most. 

Recently I’ve become aware that one of my shadow issues is arrogance. I like to think of myself as a humble person who can say, “I don’t know” when that’s my truth. However, when I perceive that other people are dominating the conversation or answering a question they don’t understand, I become agitated. From doing my own shadow work I’ve discovered why. I’m frustrated because sometimes I can be an arrogant know-it-all. Countless times in my life I have dominated conversations and argued points that I didn’t know to be true. However, for a long time, despite acting arrogantly, I was unable to identify the quality in myself and instead became irritated by it in other people. 

The good news is that as I’ve started noticing the ways in which I do not act humbly, it’s been much easier to identify it in other people without becoming uncomfortable. I’m able to be understanding and show compassion instead of frustration. I can even see the upside of arrogance: being able to have a say. By embracing this aspect of my shadow, it allows for that part of me to soften. Now in conversations I notice my tendency to dominate, but instead of continuing to talk I pause and feel what’s going on in my body.  

Once you begin to see your shadow, it becomes easier to see it’s many facets. On my better days, when I feel irritated by something someone says or does, I try to ask myself “have I ever acted selfishly, mean spiritedly, or stupidly?” (the answer is always yes). Then I dig deeper by trying to see how I may still be acting that way in my present life. It’s tough work. I’ll be the first to tell you that digging around in your shadow is not for the faint of heart. 

Luckily, there is a lighter side of transference that comes from projecting good qualities onto people. Any quality that you find yourself in envy of or infatuated with, is also part of your shadow. For example, many women feel jealous of beauty because they do not embrace their own beauty. I am envious of confident people because I don’t give myself credit for the places in my life where I am confident.

The last thing I’ll add is that shadow work is really powerful stuff. For years we’ve pushed out of our awareness a wealth of information about ourselves, and the world around us. As I’ve begun to explore both the dark and light aspects of my unloved self, I’ve unearthed a wealth of power in the form of empathy, wisdom and intuition. What I’ve learned is that my power doesn’t come from trying to change or hide from the way things are, but from accepting what is with humility and surrender while faithfully working towards a better future for myself and the world.