---
layout: post
comments: true
title: Living Free
image: http://media.tumblr.com/d6cf0c77f48b5bb2098d1011e3f544f2/tumblr_inline_n8k4md53kx1qc5937.jpg
---

When we think of freedom, we usually think of things outside of ourselves: voting rights, job opportunities, city infrastructure, and ample choices for how to live. I’ve traveled enough to get a sense of just how precious these kinds of freedoms are. But I’ve also seen that living in free country does not necessarily make a person free. Sometimes, the freer we are externally the more unfree we are on the inside. 

The reasons and the ways we limit our own freedom can be varied and unique. Usually, it has to do with trying to control our experience when we don’t feel safe. Growing up we all, consciously or subconsciously, received messages about how to live safely in the world. Some common messages are “find someone else to take care of you,” “you have to be seen as perfect,” “always be planning,” and “you can’t count on anyone.” In response to these messages, we shackle ourselves to others, become alienated from our communities, relentlessly beat ourselves up and erase the spontaneity that comes from trusting the world.  

The good news is that once we realize how we’ve jailed ourselves we can begin to loosen the chains and reclaim our freedom. For most of my life I understood relationship to mean compromise. It was simple: single people don’t have to compromise and people in a relationship do - on everything. If I didn’t want to make dinner one night, I felt like I had to do it anyway. If I wanted to stay out late with dancing with the girls, I questioned how my partner would feel. And if I wanted to go on a solo trip, I forgot about it entirely. Furthermore, in order to keep the scales balanced, you better believe I expected my partner to do the same. If I felt that he wasn’t doing his part I felt like something had been stolen from me, and I felt angry or sad. My aha moment came when I realized two things. One, my boyfriend didn’t understand the complicated and mysterious rules of coupledom compromise by which I was playing, and two, I was tired of playing a role that wasn’t me.

I’m lucky to be in a partnership with a man that fully respects my freedom, has no expectations for me to conform to gender roles and likes his time alone as much as he likes our time together. In short, he doesn’t want, or need, me to compromise myself. With this realization I had to ask myself, “if he doesn’t care what I do, then why am I doing all of this?” Asking myself this question was like lifting 100lbs off my chest. Thinking back to past relationships it occurred to me that my own self imposed duties had become overwhelming and stifling. In every instance, I eventually had to break away just to get a little breathing room. But it had never occurred to me that I might have been suffocating myself. 

In identifying this pattern, I’ve begun to see more clearly the freedoms that I wasn’t allowing myself to enjoy. The truth is that I have the power to choose how I want to live my life. So this time instead of running away from my relationship, I’m choosing how I want to be in it. And f*&% it - if I don’t want to plan dinner I’ll order in, if I go to a movie by myself I won’t have to share the popcorn, and if plans with my partner fall through I can relish a night spent in the bathtub with a good book!

Releasing myself of these duties and expectations has opened up space for me to live more authentically. I have the time and the energy to do the things I love, and I’m able to nurture myself when I’m worn down. I’m seeing possibilities for my life that I couldn’t see before, and I’m happier in my relationship then I ever thought possible. Without all the compromises we’re able to constantly rediscover ourselves and each other. It’s sexy and exciting to witness someone reclaiming their freedom.  All of this has got me asking, if we were truly free of our own expectations what kind of crazy and wonderful lives would we be living?